Energy service demand is the *useful energy* generated by an energy consuming device. 

This is, for example, a load of clothes washed, or a few kilometres travelled by a car, or a server farm running. 

It is therefore not the same as "energy demand", and one should be careful comparing it to other models or statistics which usually report on energy demand. Because energy service demand between sectors is also not often useful to compare, we only currently display individual sectors at a time.

Energy service demand is a key input for TIMES-NZ. The model optimises how the energy system can meet *energy service demand*, and so is able to select the optimal technolgoy to meet that demand: be it a heat pump or a gas heater. 

We set energy service demand exogenously; this means that the model cannot change our assumptions on service demand. They are fixed external assumptions on total demand, driven by inputs like GDP, population, or land use projections. 

This means that energy service demand is best thought of as an assumption, rather than a result of the model. However, the optimal solution also shows which technologies were selected to meet this energy service demand assumption.


It includes the option to view energy service demand by timeslice, although this can only be done for one year at a time. 

TIMES-NZ 3.0 models energy supply and demand across different "time slices", or periods of the year. We break the year down into:

 - 4 seasons (spring, summer, autumn, winter)
 - 2 types of day (weekend and weekday)
 - 3 times of day (day, night, peak). Here, peak refers to the hour between 6 and 7pm.

In this initial release, these are referred to by their internal codes. For example, SUM-WE-P would refer to summer weekend peak times. You can see detailed timeslice information on tabs where applicable, such as electricity consumption.

